Lessons I learned through PhD suffering
---

__warning: may be a bit dry__

---

#### Background

For the past four years and the foreseeable future two years, I am a PhD student
at Berkeley, studying networking and system.  Inspired by Jason Toff's [Telling
a good story is
everything](https://medium.com/@toff/telling-a-good-story-is-everything-5c66abbb23d9#.98w7ld30t),
I decided to write this blog. While "telling a good story" is equally important
in getting a successful PhD (publishing papers, getting fundings, networking
other researchers), there are other dimensions that I have learned throughout
the hard way.

As [Dr. Ford](http://westworld.wikia.com/wiki/Robert_Ford) has pointed out in
the _The Bicameral Mind_, suffering, as a passive motive, drives you into the
deeper maze.  But memory, reveries are necessary conditions for the suffering to
make a impact. Hence the following list of lessons serving as as memory.  It
could be helpful to others; but at a minimum, it's valuable to the future self.

---

#### Do not complain about what you cannot change, act to change what you can control

Envy others? Paper is rejected? Cannot get the right dataset for you problem?
Research direction is not clear?  I've been to all these miserable (may even be
common) situations while my solution, for a long period, was complaining.  I was
engaged in conversations with possibly anyone who could understand my situation
and, instead of asking for advice, I asked for sympathy.  Folks here at Berkeley
are great, so they gave me . . . sympathy.

It took me a while to transit the mindset from complaining to focusing on what I
can do and change.  But once you realize the difference, the situation may
simply be how you phrase your question.  Instead of complaining "I am not doing
useful work", ask "how can my current work be improved?"  You are more likely to
get feedback that helps you shaping your idea rather than a +1 for your
complain.

---

#### Learn to appreciate, in a critical way

In my case, "appreciation" is actually more difficult than "a critical view".
Starting from year one of PhD when we were asked to read classic papers and
review them in class, one of the requirements is to come up with a few critics.
In fact, summarizing and appreciating classics were quite easy. Most of them
have well-written abstract and introduction.  But crticizing classic is
considerably hard. For the purpose of the courses, I tried hard.  Once you've
read enough classics, it becomes very hard to appreciate some new work that
**seems** like incremental work or badly presented.  And since you are able to
even criticize the classics, finding issues in these newly published work
becomes a piece of cake.

The problem becomes that I couldn't understand why some work has been accepted
for the contribution it claim to have made.  And I also cannot appreciate much
of what I've been doing: finding its contribution small and its limitations
pervasive.

Somehow, there is also a mindset change that I haven't achived.  Your review,
critics won't change the fact those papers have been published and read by
thousands.  Instead of complaining about their problems, try focusing on their
merits, and learn from the good part of those papers.  You shouldn't be happy
for finding a few flaws of the paper, but rather you should be happy when you
learned something new, something you didn't understand, or something you've
overlooked.  I am still working on this mindset change.
